---
layout: post
title: "About Data Inquiries"
author: Tommaso Venturini
date:   2021-03-24 13:31:47 +0100
---
While data literacy is increasingly considered as an essential skill in a variety of curricula, its teaching is often unfit to prepare students for their future occupations. Trained on predefined exercises and artificial datasets, students are rarely exposed to the messiness of real data practice. They assimilate techniques of digital analysis and visualization, but fail to learn the subtler craft of thinking about and with data. Focussing too much on data crunching and not enough on the conditions of the production of data and on the consequences of their use, this type of training discourages reflexivity and encourages a naively technical approach to data literacy. Students are rarely brought to reflect on the work necessary to distill datasets from social and natural phenomena and even less on the (side)effects of managing those phenomena through their data-doubles.
To promote a richer and more realistic approach to "data literacy", Data Inquiries draws on the literature on data practices and infrastructures from disciplines such as science and technology studies, media studies, political sciences, security studies etc. Data Inquiries, however, does not deliver these insights through a conceptual instruction, but rather through group work on real projects developed by civil organizations working with data.  
To teachers, Data Inquiries offers a complete toolkit to set up a “data investigation” module (presentation, syllabus, reading list, group work organization, evaluation). The toolkit can be used as a full stand-alone course or as a component in programmes in data journalism, big data and society, data analysis, data visualization, etc. The specificity of the data investigation module is a “critical proximity” attitude – a hands-on reflexive approach to data literacy that combines perspectives from critical data studies with work on actual datasets in real-life situations. This approach is supported by the readings and conceptual discussions included in the toolkit, but more importantly it is the very essence of the group project in which students experience the actual practice of data investigation. 

To civil society organizations, Data Inquiries offers a channel toward higher education and a chance to disseminate not only the results of their projects, but also the work behind them. A growing number of civil society organizations have started to use digital data to investigate financial and political arrangements, denounce societal inequalities, or encourage progressive reforms. Yet, the backstage of their digital operations remains relatively unknown to the public and restricted to few initiates.
Data Inquiries creates attention and awareness around the work of data journalists and data activists, and allows them to find help for mundane and advanced activities in data investigation. In a few clicks, data experts can present their project and declare the type of help that they are looking for (data collection, cleaning, coding, analysis, verification, visualization, storytelling, extension, etc.). To respect the confidentiality of ongoing investigation, Data Inquiries does not host data or scripts, but merely serves to create a contact between organizations looking for collaboration on data investigations and students searching for group projects.

An example of the Data Inquiries approach is the group-project on prototyping a collaborative database on multinational taxation carried in the Data Journalism MA course at King's College London (2020-2021). Working in collaboration with the Tax Justice Network and the Open Data for Tax Justice initiative, the students of King's College have ...